ctAmerican
'Primitive
Painting

very keen. I am sure the reaction of Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch to this new appreciation of our American primitives is mixed. Although enlarging their collection has become more difficult for them, still this rise in value means that more of the precious
examples of the work of American primitive limners that have been deteriorating
for years, forgotten in attics and barns, are being rediscovered and preserved.
After all, to stimulate an enjoyment and appreciation of American primitive
painting has been the real goal of Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch. I concur in their belief
that our primitives have a particular significance. They mirror vividly the life, the
customs, and the general appearance of our ancestors and of the world in which they
lived. American primitive paintings are beautiful in themselves, inventive in their
linear patterns, decorative in their pure and simple colors, and effective in their
analysis of human character and in their revelation of unusual aspects of the beauty
of nature. Moreover, they are destined, I believe, to become an inspiration to future
painters. For there are indications that the contribution of non-objective art is diminishing and that painters are gradually returning to representation. Their emergence from abstraction is not in the direction of academic painting. They are seeking
to see the world with a fresh and innocent eye, and freshness of vision is a particular
quality of our primitive painters. Thus American primitive painting may well provide a guide which future artists will cherish and follow.
The present exhibition, a very small part of the immense collection formed by
Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch, offers an opportunity to evaluate the work of our primitive artists. Modest craftsmen, unself-conscious in their work, they pretended to no
exalted position. From their honesty and integrity resulted an original, truly American style, a style beautifully revealed in the 101 Masterpieces of American

Primitive

Painting which will now tour the United States.
John Walker, Director
N A T I O N A L G A L L E R Y OF A R T

Washington, D. C.

[ 1 0 ]

