-American
jPrimitive
¿7)
1

•
aiming

•

then so conscious, encouraged an experimental adventurousness in the minds of
man

Y artisans and craftsmen, who turned their hands to painting pictures when they

found themselves released from restrictions imposed on them by custom or by British parliamentarians. Then, too, the new nation was an attractive haven for the
many skilled craftsmen from England and the Continent—men who were eager to
escape from the

fixed

soc-iai c a s t e

system in Europe which restricted their movements,

their ownership of property, their independence, their chance for advancement.
It was a society dominated by rural individualists (as most of America was in the
first half of the nineteenth century), men and women whose practical, down-to-earth
views and reliance on empirical experience led them to advance by experiment and
observation rather than by scientific theories. In such a society the amateur or primitive painter found an atmosphere that encouraged him to experiment as a selftaught painter and to record the observations of his own eyes. Thus, his paintings
developed in an American vein and had a firm local character.
Few of the American colonists came from large urban centers in Europe where
they might have had contact with Renaissance ideas about painting. Though these
ideas were current among the aristocracy, the yeomen and farmers and middle-class
merchants and craftsmen knew little of such things. Most colonists were intent on
building a new way of life for themselves and their children, and in colonial America
they had little time for the fripperies of courtiers or the savants.
As the first colonists in New England brought with them medieval traditions of
house building, so they unconsciously carried to the New World medieval traditions
of painting and decorating.
The use of the term "medieval" does not imply that the American primitive
painters were in any sense trained painters of any of the medieval European schools
of painting; but rather that they worked naturally in the old medieval manner rather
than in the self-conscious Italian Renaissance academic manner. They were not concerned with the inexorable mathematics of Alberti's laws of perspective, they had
no rules for chiaroscuro, they had no knowledge of anatomy. Their vision was not
formed upon the classic Mediterranean shapes of ancient Greece and Rome. T h e y
were in fact almost completely untouched by the Italian Renaissance disciplines.
Lacking academic paraphernalia, the American primitive artist fell into the mode
of medieval painting of northern Europe where symbolic shapes and bright colors
represented what the painter knew and felt rather than what he saw. Thus the gaudy
colors, the hieratic poses, the non-Greco-Roman compositions of American primitive
painting are related to the styles of painting to be seen in early illuminated manuscripts and in the wall paintings of medieval times. Curiously close parallels can be
found between the two types of painting. In many portraits by American primitive
painters are to be found the same sort of short-hand symbols for eyes, noses, mouths,

[20]

