in the towns along the Hudson River and in western Connecticut and Massachusetts.
He died in Stockbridge, Massachusetts.
59.

Mrs. Mayer and Daughter—attributed

to Phillips

Illustrated on page 93

aAmerican
^Primitive
<lArtists

P O W E L L , H . M . T . [active about 1855]
H. M . T . Powell worked in California, and his pictorial record of his trip to
California over the Santa Fe Trail was discovered and published some years ago.

89.

Studebaker in His Wagon-Tire Shop, Hangtown, California
Illustrated on page 123

P R I O R , W I L L I A M M A T T H E W [1806-1873]
William Matthew Prior was born in Bath, Maine, in 1806. He painted portraits and landscapes as an itinerant in many parts of New England and as far south
as Baltimore. In 1841 he settled in Boston and remained there for the rest of his life.
M a n y of his portraits are painted in a flat, simple style; they were painted quickly
and sold for very small sums. For pictures painted in a more highly finished style, he
charged higher prices. He aimed at mass production, using factory methods, and was
prepared to paint anything a customer might desire. One of his specialties was painting portraits of George Washington on glass. He died in Boston in 1873.

87.

The Burnish Sisters
Illustrated on page 121

83.

The Younger Generation—attributed

to Prior

Illustrated on page 1 1 7

STOCK, JOSEPH W H I T I N G [1815-1855]
Joseph Whiting Stock was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1 8 1 5 . In
childhood he was badly crippled in an accident. One of his doctors suggested that he
take up painting as a means of earning a living. He is said to have produced more
than nine hundred portraits. Stock appears to be one of the few primitive painters
who kept a diary that has been preserved. From it one gets a vivid picture of the
artist, his joys and tragedies, as well as a complete list of his pictures. One of his
doctors constructed a special wheelchair which enabled him to travel, and he visited
a number of towns in Massachusetts and Rhode Island painting portraits. Most of
his life was spent in Springfield, where he died in 1855.

58.

Baby in Wicker Basket
Illustrated on page 92

[83]

