FOREWORD

W

EBSTER'S definition of the word "primitive" includes the following words:

"Characterized by the manner, style, simplicity, rudeness, or the like, of
a former time; old-fashioned."

Since the time of the earliest cavemen, or thereabouts, men—and often women—

have wanted to express visually their feelings, their reactions, their beliefs, on walls,
on ceilings, on a piece of zinc or paper or on a piece of furniture. The expression of
emotions, sentiments, and deep, perhaps unconscious, urges has produced paintings
that are as different as Michelangelo's w6rk in the Sistine Chapel and the prepared
canvas scattered with drops of paint or even brushed with a single color.
From colonial times well into the nineteenth century some of our American forebears expressed themselves with renderings of fruits and flowers, birds and beasts,
pictures of their surroundings and of their dear ones. The galaxy of the 101
pieces of American Primitive

Painting

Master-

from the collection of Edgar William and

Bernice Chrysler Garbisch tells of the sincerity and fortitude of the early settlers and
the artists who painted them. These were not courtiers from the pleasure-seeking
coterie surrounding the kings of France, nor Roman warriors, nor Egyptian slaves;
these were God-fearing, self-respecting pioneer Americans who found hard work
and rewards for their work in a slowly developing society. Some, both patrons and
painters, had close ties with their lands of origin. The English country squire or early
academician from London often influenced those who saw his pictures or had experiences similar to his. The shipment to America of works of art, whether English or
French, often gave inspiration to American painters. On the other hand a Benjamin
West renounced the ways of his early style when he took up residence in England.
There is no reason to be condescending or diffident about the American primitive
and its place in the history of art. A Byzantine mosaic or a Spanish fresco cannot be
judged solely in the terms of Raphael's Disputa or a Roger van der Weyden portrait
or religious painting any more than a photograph should be judged by the standards

