T H E U S , J E R E M I A H [about 1 7 1 9 - 1 7 7 4 ]
^yiMCi Uil)l

Jeremiah Theus was born probably in Switzerland. He came to America
ParentS

P r i m i t i v e

a

§rouP

German-Swiss colonists about 1735. Some time about

1739 he settled in Charleston, South Carolina, where he opened a drawing school and
^Artists

set

himself up as a portrait painter. He was very popular and painted practically

every person of importance in Charleston society and the surrounding plantations.
It is said that he was known locally as "the court painter." He died in Charleston.
13.

Devout Lady—attributed

to Theus

Illustrated on page 39
• V A N D E R L Y N , P I E T E R [about 1687-1778]
Pieter Vanderlyn was born in Holland and served in the Dutch navy. H e
came from Curacao to the Province of New Y o r k some time around 1 7 1 8 , staying
for a time in Albany and later settling permanently in Kingston. It is believed that
he was a house painter, who on occasion tried his hand at portrait painting and painting signboards for taverns. His grandson, the artist John Vanderlyn, claimed that
his grandfather painted portraits. N o definite record of any of these pictures has
been found, but a number of early Hudson Valley primitive portraits have been
attributed to him.
9.

Young Lady with a Rose—attributed

to Vanderlyn

Illustrated on page 35
W E S T , B E N J A M I N [1738-1820]
Benjamin West achieved the most improbable transition; he began his
career as a primitive painter in rural Pennsylvania and ended it as Historical Painter
to the King of England and President of the R o y a l Academy. West was born in
Springfield, Pennsylvania, near Philadelphia in 1738. His earliest efforts at drawing
and painting impressed some gentlemen in Philadelphia, and through their efforts
the young artist was able to set out to study in Rome in 1760. After three years in
Italy he settled in London. In 1772 he was appointed Historical Painter to the King.
H e held the Presidency of the R o y a l Academy from 1792 until his death in 1820.
Perhaps West's greatest importance stems not so much from his paintings as from
his influence upon all the young American artists who came to study painting with
him—Matthew Pratt, Charles Willson Peale, Gilbert Stuart, Samuel Morse, R e m brandt Peale, Robert Fulton, Washington Allston, John Trumbull, and John
Singleton Copley. In Benjamin West, all these pupils found a conscientious teacher
and an unfailingly generous friend.

15.

Sarah Ursula Rose
Illustrated on page 41

