QAmerican
'Primitive
Painting

of a nineteenth-century French academician or Impressionist painter. How can we
gainsay giving a place in our museums to these direct, often accomplished, performances of the "primitive" artist?
To evaluate art in its many ramifications, we must accept a vocabulary which is
all-inclusive, not just the "lingo" of the romantic, the prosaic, the advanced or the
sophisticated artists and thinkers of one generation or another. Each philosophy has
its limitations and in terms of another may become outmoded. The universal mind
has achieved sentiments and expressions of lasting, or at least recurring, impetus.
In our day we may accept many of the precepts of the Greek philosopher and may
find the medieval mind limited by unacceptable convictions. Both rational and irrational observations may be fashionable in one place or at one period and most
unacceptable at others.
Returning to the present-day use of the word "primitive," we must examine the
entire gamut of all our civilizations. The works of art from pre-historic cultures are
no longer considered inept and barbarous because we have found for ourselves that
a Cycladic marble has a message not to be discovered in a fifth-century Attic sculpture, an Italian primitive, or a Gothic painting. Perhaps a Byzantine Madonna, a
Cimabue or a Duccio Maesta does not meet the requirements of a Murillo or a
Rubens, but the message may be as real and even as poignant when it is understood.
There have been a few collectors in the American primitive field who by familiarity and intensive study and selection have been awakened and are awakening others
to the virtues and respectability of their particular collecting passions. It is a remarkable commentary on collecting in our own times that Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch
have chosen to live with eighteenth-century French furniture and French Impressionist and post-Impressionist paintings in their New York home, and seventeenth- and eighteenth-century American furniture and American primitives in their
beautiful Maryland manor house.
In a great encyclopedic museum like the Metropolitan we show September Morn
by a forgotten artist, a Pollock which is among the masters of the current rage, along
with our Grecos, Rembrandts and Master of Flemalle and Georges de L a Tour.
American primitives were stimulating and attractive in their time, and their day
has again come back. An unknown, unrecorded Pennsylvania or Massachusetts
portrait painter today shares the limelight of wider focus. Our terms of reference
today are universal, encyclopedic, not limited in their scope nor shrouded in misconceptions of terminology and contrived platitudes.
James J . Rorimer, Director
T H E M E T R O P O L I T A N M U S E U M OF A R T

New York, New York

[8]

