"PREFACE

E

VERYONE interested in art owes a debt to Edgar William and Bernice
Chrysler Garbisch. They have assembled the most extensive and important
collection of American primitive paintings ever brought together. This in

itself is a remarkable achievement. But of still greater significance, they have
rescued numerous canvases and panels that were rapidly deteriorating and would
soon have vanished completely.
Collecting is often an arduous pursuit. E v e r since their first purchases of American primitive paintings, Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch have devoted a large part of
their time to a search for the finest examples, to a study of those already collected,
and to the investigation of problems in restoration and preservation. Since their
original gift of a part of their collection was made to the National Gallery of A r t in
1 9 5 3 , 1 have been privileged to watch them at work, and I know something of their
excitement during their quest for new pictures; their anxiety while a panel or canvas,
obscured by dirt and almost impenetrable varnish, is being cleaned in accordance
with their strict standards of restoration; the effort they put into research, into the
pursuit of a correct attribution, if not to a known artist at least to the anonymous
painter of a similar group of works; and finally the pains they take in framing their
paintings, either restoring the original frames or finding other American frames of
the kind the artists themselves might have chosen.
An important result of such concentrated attention to a particular field of collecting is that Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch are now acknowledged to be the outstanding collectors of American primitive paintings and are, therefore, almost invariably
given the first choice by dealers and private owners. This does not diminish their own
initiative; they still look for hidden and forgotten masterpieces. At the same time,
their success as collectors has brought with it a corresponding disadvantage. M a n y
other collectors have followed in their footsteps; and as demand has exceeded supply,
the competition for American primitive paintings of excellent quality has become

