and hands that one finds in medieval manuscript illuminations or in Spanish romanesque mural paintings.
T h e very great number of American primitive portraits is partly explained when
we remember that before the invention of the camera the painted portrait had the
function of marking the various stages of social life and the rituals of living and dying.
T h u s , there were many portraits of infants and children; many pairs of wedding

American
Primitive
Painting

portraits; many memorial portraits of the dead. This traditional attitude toward
portraits is but another link between the medieval European painting tradition and
that of the American primitive.
There are curiously interesting differences between the paintings produced in
America in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and those produced in the
nineteenth century. The differences stem from the attitudes of the artists toward
their work and from the kind of patronage offered to them in the two eras. Primitive
pictures of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were for the most part Sturdy
and ambitious provincial attempts to produce approximations to current European
styles of painting—usually in more or less formal portraits. The provincial artist
learned of these styles from engravings and mezzotints imported from Europe.
Most primitive painters and limners were engaged in trades that were in some
way related to the arts. T h e y were house painters, sign painters, silversmiths, or engravers. B u t some were aspiring young men who wanted to conquer the grand art
world of London, as Benjamin West, Matthew Pratt, Ralph Earle, and John Singleton Copley did. B u t most of the American primitive painters of the nineteenth
century were more modest and local in their ambitions. T h e y were satisfied to be
Americans and to embellish their daily lives in Seneca Falls; Paris, Maine; or Shickshinny, Pennsylvania. This they did with rustic painted records of their time; with
precisely tinted dreams of unknown grandeur, or with devastating direct statements
in paint about their contemporaries, in the form of portraits.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when so many Americans turned
their hands to painting, they were close to the traditional home handicrafts and
household industries. In the old days every man had many highly developed manual
skills, and if he did not know how to handle a woodsman's axe he could manage the
whittler's knife. And every housewife knew the arts of spinning, weaving, sewing,
dyeing, and a thousand other handicrafts and skills—candles and soap and coats and
breeches were all made at home. Thus, there was a vast population in America with
diversified manual skills. Woodsman, farmer, urban craftsman, and homeowner
knew how to build whatever they might need, and their wives were artists who could
produce good loaves of bread as well as handsome bits of embroidery and weaving.
T h e many hands thus trained in the exercise of many skills found it easy to take
up the brush and dash off a landscape, a portrait, or a fanciful composition.

o

n

