proof of the universal urge to paint, to draw, to ornament, to enliven and enhance,

eAmerican to glorify the plain or rough surfaces of life with pictures, with colors, with rhythmic
patterns of joyful exuberance.
Primitive Those who fall under the spell of American primitive paintings are on occasion
forced to defend the sometimes highly specialized charms of these pictures, warding
Painting off the attacks of those who are not familiar with American history; of those who do
not know the basic precepts of painting; of those who lack any trace of that special
feeling of romantic nostalgia for the rusticities of yesteryear. Such unfortunate
people are not properly prepared to consider American primitive paintings with the
seriousness and delight they deserve.
Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch published in the magazine Art in America

a brief

statement about American primitive paintings, saying, " T h e y merit an important
place not only in the history of American art but in the history of world art as well."
And indeed it is now necessary to consider American primitive paintings from just
such a broad point of view.
T h e appreciation of primitive art and folk art has been termed " t h e appreciation
of the art of the unself-conscious by the self-conscious." It is a phenomenon that appears only in highly sophisticated societies. Folk art, peasant art, and primitive art
at their own true levels are valued by maker and user for their ritualistic or ornamental use; these things were made for special purposes, and the fulfillment of these
purposes is what the true primitive, the folk, and the peasant demand.
In these paintings we see the unfettered hand of the "primitive" painter—
amateur or artisan—dashing forward into difficult artistic problems with sublime
self-confidence. These problems are attacked with a free-wheeling abandon unhindered by the laws of perspective or gravity, unawed by the grand pronouncements
of the official European academies of art, by the time-honored precepts of the old
masters of Renaissance Europe, or by the sacred writings of ancient Greek or R o m a n
critics of painting. T h e freedom of the frontier, the almost total isolation of many
rural communities, encouraged the amateur artists to go ahead on their own. T h u s
the American primitive paintings reflect the spirit of their time. They preserve with
a wholesome simplicity the natural visions of the painter whose eye and hand were
neither guided nor corrupted b y the artistic theories of the Renaissance.
In these paintings is summed up a number of important aspects of the spirit of the
American people. Although there are unsophisticated crudities here and there, and
naïvetés in plenty, yet above and beyond all these faults—if they are faults—is the
good-humored expression of self-confidence, or of a desire for medieval color and
ornamentation, rather than for the more subtle Renaissance, Leonardesque beauties
of sophisticated academic painting.
In the art of the American primitive painter one finds two great qualities—humor

[18]

