INTRODUCTION

T

HE collection of American primitive paintings which Edgar William and

Bernice Chrysler Garbisch have brought together over a period of more than

seventeen years is the most comprehensive of its kind yet assembled; al-

though no final count is ever possible, since the collection grows all the while, it now

consists of almost two thousand five hundred pictures. In 1953 Colonel and Mrs.
Garbisch gave a selection of paintings from their collection to the National Gallery
of Art in Washington, D. C. N o w , in view of the growth of the collection, they are
contemplating the eventual distribution of selected groups to other important
museums throughout the United States. In the meantime those paintings not yet
given are kept in various places; usually the newest acquisitions are to be found in
the Colonel's office in New Y o r k City. Certain favorite pictures ornament the rooms
of a charming manor house on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. In fact it was the
decoration of this country home that started Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch on their
enthusiastic search for these colorful mementos of the American past.
B u t with the constant expansion of the collection, this original project has grown
into the management of a vast private museum of American pictures, with all the
attendant problems of storage and display, of framing, cataloging, restoration. B u t
these serious museum problems are outweighed by the collectors' search for new
treasures and by the thrill of discovering new masterpieces.
T h e amazingly successful search for these enchanting, or hilarious, or forbidding
examples of our native art is due entirely to the boundless enthusiasm of Colonel and
Mrs. Garbisch. I t is through the enthusiasm of such dedicated collectors, who have
often saved these paintings from destruction, that we are now able to enjoy so many
American primitive paintings in all their unsophisticated glory. Some of them are
undoubtedly jolly masterpieces of rustic humor, yet others are shy and tender statements of quaint formality. T o some minds these paintings are most interesting as

