and candor—that are usually concealed, if not entirely lacking, in the more formal,
more sophisticated and self-conscious forms of European and American academic
painting of the time. A rollicking sense of humor is revealed in many primitive genre
paintings; and in his primitive portraits the artist has observed his subjects wi t h a

lAuiCTlCCLTl

Primitive

hard-eyed and unsparing candor piercing beyond mere pattern or caricature, or
anatomy, into regions of psychological depth which no academically trained "so-

¡UltlH
o

ciety" portrait painter has ever dared to explore. But humor and candor were typical
early American characteristics—the humor of the American frontier is broad and
Chaucerian; the uncompromising candor is perhaps a result of frontier democracy.
M a n y American primitive paintings are the works of amateurs who painted for
the sheer pleasure of painting; the work itself was its own reward. But in all these
pictures one finds medieval displays of humor and free invention—there is a simplicity, a directness, a liveliness that one automatically associates with American freedom. Perhaps no small part of their appeal to a neurotic and sophisticated age is that
in them we see the primitive artist courageously plunging into strange realms to find
the means with which to express his solid convictions about the world as he knew it;
he has preserved for us nostalgic images and scenes of innocence and tranquility.
According to Colonel and Mrs. Garbisch, "to really understand American primitive painting, one must have at least a basic knowledge of American history, for
that is the only way one can get a true concept of the people whose spirit and character these paintings so vividly reflect."
Though the facts of the political, military, and economic history of the American
Revolution are well known, one of the most significant results of that history was the
change in the status of persons; the transformation of provincial colonists into independent Americans. After the Revolution the vast landholdings of many Tory
families were broken up and sold in small lots. Any man could take his axe and hoe
and set out into the wilderness and start a farm for himself, clearing the land and
building his own house.
The man who could plan and put up even a simple log house—though he might
never build a Parthenon—must possess in some degree the three-dimensional imagination of the artist, the architect, the engineer; and, having this all-important faculty, he would be able to solve the problems in making the design for a building, for
an engineering project, for a machine, or for the painting of a picture.
Although there were more artisans and amateur painters at work in provincial
America in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries than is generally supposed, the
great burgeoning of American primitive art did not occur until after the American
Revolution, and it came to its fullest development in the first half of the nineteenth
century. The cause of this is interesting to speculate upon.
Perhaps the new-found freedom and independence, of which every American was

[

i

9

]

