When the industries and crafts were separated from the home, the pursuit of the

^American
Primitive
Painting

handicrafts suffered a severe setback. When the sign painter's family no longer lived
in the shop and assisted in the tasks at hand, when the loom and spinning wheel became mechanized monsters and moved out of the home, everyone suffered. There
was, of course, less drudgery, but this improvement was offset by the loss of opportunity to develop at home the instinctive skills of the craftsman which had been
handed down from father to son, from mother to daughter, since medieval times.
Today, when the do-it-yourself fashion is forcing many apartment dwellers on
the New Frontier to learn the antique virtues of self-sufficiency, we can appreciate
the skills of our ancestors who could so handily turn out a pair of boots, a length of
cloth, a seaworthy sloop, or a painting.
The serious nature of the loss of household arts and skills—through lack of opportunity to develop them in the old-fashioned way—was recognized later in the nineteenth century. Lessons in drawing and design were introduced into the public
schools in Philadelphia and Boston, and "industrial art" schools were established.
A school of design for women was instituted in Philadelphia as early as 1844, and in
the next decade The Cooper Union in New York was offering courses in drawing and
painting for women.
Modern enthusiasm for American primitive paintings is found among several
distinct groups whose interests do not usually run in parallel. These groups are the
antiquarians and collectors of American antiques—the first to collect such pictures
in the late nineteenth century—and the modern artists and collectors of modern art,
who recognized in these paintings the same naive, unacademic charms found in the
arts of truly primitive tribes of Asia, Africa, and America. Another group that sees
a special value in American primitive paintings is the social historians, who find in
th^m a fascinating record of the culture and social structure of other days.
These pictures do preserve a fascinating American record of places and faces; of
fashions and manners; enough to engage the rapt attention of the scholarly sociologist
and the historian as well as the eye of the modern painters, professional and amateur;
for modern painters can study these free and often daring experiments in design and
color with real profit.
American primitive paintings can no longer be considered merely as charming
antiques. We look at them now without the condescension of the academic artist,
without the limiting, local specializations of the antique collector, without the
special, somewhat patronizing attitudes of the lover of modern art. W7e see these
pictures in their true perspective as an important part of American art history and
in their correct relation to the history of the art of the Western World.
In one of the first books on painting published in English there is a remarkable
description of the special qualities we find in American primitive painting—in the

[22]

